Add Getting started tutorials. (#2026)
prometheus/docs: content/docs/tutorials/understanding_metric_types.md

    - Counter
    - Gauge
    - Histogram
    - Summary 

## Counter

Counter is a metric value which can only increase or reset i.e the value cannot reduce than the previous value. It can be used for metrics like number of requests, no of errors etc.

Type the below query in the query bar and click execute.

<code>go\_gc\_duration\_seconds\_count</code>

[![Counter](/assets/tutorial/counter_example.png)](/assets/tutorial/counter_example.png)

The rate() function in PromQL takes the history of metrics over a time frame and calculates how fast value is increasing per second. Rate is applicable on counter values only.

<code> rate(go\_gc\_duration\_seconds\_count[5m])</code>
[![Rate Counter](/assets/tutorial/rate_example.png)](/assets/tutorial/rate_example.png)

## Gauge

Gauge is a number which can either go up or down. It can be used for metrics like number of pods in a cluster, number of events in an queue etc.

<code> go\_memstats\_heap\_alloc\_bytes</code>
[![Gauge](/assets/tutorial/gauge_example.png)](/assets/tutorial/gauge_example.png)

PromQL functions like `max_over_time`, `min_over_time` and `avg_over_time` can be used on gauge metrics

## Histogram

> Histogram is bit complex metric type when compared to the previous two. Histogram can be used for any calculated value which is counted based on bucket values, the buckets can be configured by the user. It is a cumulative metric and provides sum of all the values by default. This is applicable for metrics like request time, cpu temperature etc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Histogram is a more complex metric type when compared to the previous two. Histogram can be used for any calculated value which is counted based on bucket values. Bucket boundaries can be configured by the developer. A common example would the time it takes to reply to a request, called latency.
```

> Example: Lets sat we want to observe the time taken to process api requests. Instead of storing the request time for each request, histogram metric allows us to approximate and store frequency of requests which fall into particular buckets. We define buckets for time taken like 0.3,0.5,0.7,1,1.2. So these are our buckets and once the time taken for a request is calculated it is added to the count of all the buckets that are higher than the value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: Lets sat we want to observe the time taken to process api requests. Instead of storing the request time for each request, histograms allow us to store them in buckets. We define buckets for time taken, for example `lower or equal 0.3` , `le 0.5`, `le 0.7`, `le 1`, and `le 1.2`. So these are our buckets and once the time taken for a request is calculated it is added to the count of all the buckets which bucket boundaries are higher than the measured value.
```

Lets say Request 1 for endpoint “/ping” takes 0.25 s. The count values for the buckets will be.

> /ping

> | Bucket    | Count |
> | --------- | ----- |
> | 0 - 0.3   | 1     |
> | 0.3 - 0.5 | 1     |
> | 0.5 - 0.7 | 1     |
> | 0.7 - 1   | 1     |
> | 1 - 1.2   | 1     |
> | +Inf      | 1     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Bucket    | Count |
| --------- | ----- |
| 0 - 0.3   | 1     |
| 0 - 0.5 | 1     |
| 0 - 0.7 | 1     |
| 0 - 1   | 1     |
| 1 - 1.2   | 1     |
| 0 - +Inf      | 1     |
```

Note: +Inf bucket is added by default.

(Since histogram is a cumulative frequency 1 is added to all the buckets which are greater than the value)

Request 2 for endpoint “/ping” takes 0.4s The count values for the buckets will be this.

> /ping

> | Bucket    | Count |
> | --------- | ----- |
> | 0 - 0.3   | 1     |
> | 0.3 - 0.5 | 2     |
> | 0.5 - 0.7 | 2     |
> | 0.7 - 1   | 2     |
> | 1 - 1.2   | 2     |
> | +Inf      | 2     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Bucket    | Count |
| --------- | ----- |
| 0 - 0.3   | 1     |
| 0 - 0.5 | 2     |
| 0 - 0.7 | 2     |
| 0 - 1   | 2     |
| 0 - 1.2   | 2     |
| 0 - +Inf      | 2     |
```

> Since 0.4 lies in the seconds bucket(0.3-0.5) all the buckets above the calculated values count is increased.
> Histogram is used to find average and percentile values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since 0.4 is below 0.5, all buckets up to that boundary increase their counts.
```

Let's explore a histogram metric from the prometheus UI and apply few functions.

<code>prometheus\_http\_request\_duration\_seconds\_bucket{handler="/graph"}</code>

[![Histogram](/assets/tutorial/histogram_example.png)](/assets/tutorial/histogram_example.png)

> histogram_quantile() function can be used to calculate calculate quantiles from histogram

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`histogram_quantile()` function can be used to calculate calculate quantiles from histogram
```

<code>histogram\_quantile(0.9,prometheus\_http\_request\_duration\_seconds\_bucket{handler="/graph"})</code>

[![Histogram Quantile](/assets/tutorial/histogram_quantile_example.png)](/assets/tutorial/histogram_quantile_example.png)

The graph shows that the 90th percentile is 0.09, To find the histogram_quantile over last 5m you can use the rate() and time frame

<code>histogram_quantile(0.9, rate(prometheus\_http\_request\_duration\_seconds\_bucket{handler="/graph"}[5m]))</code>

[![Histogram Quantile Rate](/assets/tutorial/histogram_rate_example.png)](/assets/tutorial/histogram_rate_example.png)

## Summary

> Summary is similar to histogram and calculates quantiles which can be configured, but it is calculated on the application level hence aggregation of metrics from multiple instances of the same process is not possible. It is used when the buckets of a metric is not known beforehand and is highly recommended to use histogram over summary whenever possible. Calculating summary on the application level is also quite expensive and it is not recommended to be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summaries also measure events and are an alternative to histograms. They are cheaper, but lose more data. They are calculated on the application level hence aggregation of metrics from multiple instances of the same process is not possible. They are used when the buckets of a metric is not known beforehand, but it is highly recommended to use histograms over summaries whenever possible.
```
